[]{#TOP}

GTSPP Observations
==================

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ![DART project                    | Jump to [DART Documentation Main  |
| logo](../../../documentation/imag | Index](../../../documentation/ind |
| es/Dartboard7.png){height="70"}   | ex.html)\                         |
|                                   | version information for this      |
|                                   | file:\                            |
|                                   | \$Id\$                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

[DATA SOURCES](#DataSources) / [PROGRAMS](#Programs) /
[NAMELIST](#Namelist) / [MODULES](#Modules) / [ERRORS](#Errors) /
[FUTURE PLANS](#FuturePlans) / [TERMS OF USE](#Legalese)

Overview
--------

GTSPP (Global Temperature-Salinity Profile Program) data measures
vertical profiles of ocean temperature and salinity. The [GTPSS home
page](http://www.nodc.noaa.gov/GTSPP/index.html) has detailed
information about the repository, observations, and datasets. The
programs in this directory convert from the netcdf files found in the
repository into DART observation sequence (obs\_seq) file format.

[]{#DataSources}

<div class="top">

\[[top](#)\]

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

DATA SOURCES
------------

Data from the GTSPP can be downloaded interactively from
[here](http://www.nodc.noaa.gov/cgi-bin/gtspp/gtsppform01.cgi). It is
delivered in [netCDF](http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf) file
format, one vertical profile per netCDF file.

Currently each vertical profile is stored in a separate file, so
converting a months's worth of observations involves downloading many
individual files. The converter program can take a list of input files,
so it is easy to collect a month of observations together into a single
output file with one execution of the converter program.

The units in the source file are degrees C for temperature, g/kg for
salinity, and so far we have not found any error information (not
quality control, but observation instrument error values). There is
probably instrument source information encoded in these files, but so
far we don't have the key. The quality control values are read and only
those with a QC of 1 are retained.

[]{#Programs}

<div class="top">

\[[top](#)\]

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PROGRAMS
--------

The data is distributed in
[netCDF](http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf) file format. DART
requires all observations to be in a proprietary format often called
DART "obs\_seq" format. The files in this directory, a combination of C
shell scripts and a Fortran source executable, do this data conversion.

[]{#Namelist}

<div class="top">

\[[top](#)\]

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NAMELIST
--------

This namelist is read from the file *input.nml*. Namelists start with an
ampersand '&' and terminate with a slash '/'. Character strings that
contain a '/' must be enclosed in quotes to prevent them from
prematurely terminating the namelist.

<div class="namelist">

    &gtspp_to_obs_nml
       gtspp_netcdf_file     = '1234567.nc'
       gtspp_netcdf_filelist = 'gtspp_to_obs_filelist'
       gtspp_out_file        = 'obs_seq.gtspp'
       avg_obs_per_file      = 500
       debug                 = .false.
    /

</div>

\
\

<div>

  Item                      Type                 Description
  ------------------------- -------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  gtspp\_netcdf\_file       character(len=128)   The input filename when converting a single profile. Only one of the two file or filelist items can have a valid value, so to use the single filename set the list name 'gtspp\_netcdf\_filelist' to the empty string (' ').
  gtspp\_netcdf\_filelist   character(len=128)   To convert a series of profiles in a single execution create a text file which contains each input file, in ascii, one filename per line. Set this item to the name of that file, and set 'gtspp\_netcdf\_file' to the empty string (' ').
  gtspp\_out\_file          character(len=128)   The output file to be created. To be compatible with earlier versions of this program, if this file already exists it will be read in and the new data will be inserted into that file.
  avg\_obs\_per\_file       integer              The code needs an upper limit on the number of observations generated by this program. It can be larger than the actual number of observations converted. The total number of obs is computed by multiplying this number by the number of input files. If you get an error because there is no more room to add observations to the output file, increase this number.
  debug                     logical              If true, output more debugging messages.

</div>

\
\
[]{#Modules}

<div class="top">

\[[top](#)\]

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

MODULES USED
------------

    types_mod
    time_manager_mod
    utilities_mod
    location_mod
    obs_sequence_mod
    obs_def_mod
    obs_def_ocean_mod
    obs_kind_mod
    netcdf

[]{#KnownBugs}

<div class="top">

\[[top](#)\]

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

KNOWN BUGS
----------

Does not have correct code for setting observation error variance yet.
Also, not sure if the incoming data qc is strict enough.

[]{#FuturePlans}

<div class="top">

\[[top](#)\]

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

FUTURE PLANS
------------

none

[]{#Legalese}

<div class="top">

\[[top](#)\]

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Terms of Use
------------

DART software - Copyright UCAR. This open source software is provided by
UCAR, "as is", without charge, subject to all terms of use at
<http://www.image.ucar.edu/DAReS/DART/DART_download>

  ------------------ -----------------------------
  Contact:           nancy collins
  Revision:          \$Revision\$
  Source:            \$URL\$
  Change Date:       \$Date\$
  Change history:    try "svn log" or "svn diff"
  ------------------ -----------------------------


