[]{#TOP}

Radar Observations
==================

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ![DART project                    | Jump to [DART Documentation Main  |
| logo](../../../documentation/imag | Index](../../../documentation/ind |
| es/Dartboard7.png){height="70"}   | ex.html)\                         |
|                                   | version information for this      |
|                                   | file:\                            |
|                                   | \$Id\$                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

[DATA SOURCES](#DataSources) / [PROGRAMS](#Programs) /
[MODULES](#Modules) / [NAMELIST](#Namelist) / [ERRORS](#Errors) /
[FUTURE PLANS](#FuturePlans) / [TERMS OF USE](#Legalese)

Overview
--------

Several programs for converting radar observations into DART obs\_seq
format exist, and will be placed in this directory when they are ready
for distribution. Observations generated by these programs have been
successfully assimilated with weather models in the DART framework.

This directory currently contains a program for generating synthetic
radar observations for a [WSR-88D
(NEXRAD)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WSR-88D). It can generate
reflectivity and/or doppler radial velocity observations with clear-air
or storm sweep patterns, for testing or for OSSEs (Observing System
Simulation Experiments).

There are challenges to working with radar data; for more information
contact us.

[]{#DataSources}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

DATA SOURCES
------------

 

[]{#Programs}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PROGRAMS
--------

*create\_obs\_radar\_sequence* generates one or more sets of synthetic
radar observations. Change into the *work* subdirectory and run
*quickbuild.csh* to build this program.

Many DART users working with radar observations are using the WRF
Weather and Research Forecast model. See the [WRF tests
directory](../../../models/wrf/regression/Radar/README) for pointers to
data to run a radar test case.

In addition to the programs available in the DART distribution, the
following external program produces DART observation sequence files:

-   [Observation Processing And Wind Synthesis
    (OPAWS)](http://code.google.com/p/opaws/): OPAWS can process NCAR
    Dorade (sweep) and NCAR EOL Foray (netcdf) radar data. It analyzes
    (grids) data in either two-dimensions (on the conical surface of
    each sweep) or three-dimensions (Cartesian). Analyses are output in
    netcdf, Vis5d, and/or DART (Data Assimilation Research Testbed)
    formats.

[]{#KnownBugs}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

KNOWN BUGS
----------

none

[]{#FuturePlans}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

FUTURE PLANS
------------

none

[]{#Legalese}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Terms of Use
------------

DART software - Copyright UCAR. This open source software is provided by
UCAR, "as is", without charge, subject to all terms of use at
<http://www.image.ucar.edu/DAReS/DART/DART_download>

  ------------------ -----------------------------
  Contact:           DART core group
  Revision:          \$Revision\$
  Source:            \$URL\$
  Change Date:       \$Date\$
  Change history:    try "svn log" or "svn diff"
  ------------------ -----------------------------


